**APPLICANT'S BACKGROUND AND GOALS FOR FELLOWSHIP TRAINING**

**A. Doctoral Dissertation and Research Experience**

[2012-2014: Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati
(Advisors: Dr. Kevin Shockley & Dr. Michael Riley)]{.underline}

As an undergraduate at the University of Cincinnati, I worked as a
research assistant in the Cognition Action and Perception Lab,
underneath Dr. Kevin Shockley, and aided in the data collection of Dr.
Julie Weast-Knapp's dissertation experiments. This work introduced me to
perception and action, ecological psychology, and the theory of
affordances. In my study of ecological psychology, I became interested
in complex systems and intrapersonal synergies between perceptual and
motor systems; this led to my senior thesis project under the direction
of Dr. Michael Riley, where I investigated the postural facilitation in
auditory localization tasks. My thesis project led to my first
conference presentation and laid the groundwork for my interest in
complex perception and action systems.

[2014-Present: Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, and Psychological
Sciences, Brown University (Advisor: Dr. William Warren)]{.underline}

My interest in complex systems and perception and action led me to work
with my PhD advisor at Brown University, Dr. Bill Warren, studying the
self-organization of human crowd behavior.

To understand how crowd behavior might be self-organized, i.e. driven by
the local perceptual interactions between "neighbors" in the crowd, my
advisor and I implemented what is commonly referred to in the study of
collective motion in animal groups as *the modeling cycle*. The modeling
cycle combines efforts from empirical investigation, model development
and simulation, with real-world observation of collective motion to
create a holistic understanding of the system in question. Using our
12x14m laboratory space, I became an expert in the design of virtual
reality experiments, where I would manipulate a virtual crowd stimulus
and measure participant's walking trajectories as they responded to the
crowd by walking alongside them in our large tracking space, all while
completely immersed in our Head Mounted Display (HMD). I would then use
insights gleaned from virtual reality experiments to develop and tweak
our lab's model of crowd behavior. We then use this model to simulate
the behavior of real human "swarms", where large groups of subjects
(10-40) all participate in the experiment simultaneously in a gymnasium
sized recording space. By analyzing their rigid body motion capture, and
simulating individual trajectories within the real human swarms, we can
test how well our data-driven model generalizes to real world behavior.
This method served as the basis for understanding the complex
interpersonal coordination problem of human crowd behavior, but the same
method can (and will) be applied to studying other perception and action
problems, such as the visuo-locomotor system.

In my early graduate career, I first characterized the zone of
influence, or the "neighborhood" of individual pedestrians when walking
in crowds, by testing and developing our agent-based model of human
crowd behavior (Section A, below). With an understanding of an
individual's neighborhood, my dissertation investigated two key
components in self-organized crowd behavior: 1. The rules of
recruitment, i.e. how an individual is pulled into collective motion and
2. Individual decision making within crowds, i.e. how a pedestrian
following a splitting crowd chooses to align with a particular
sub-group. In sum, my dissertation work has been invaluable in
demonstrating how crowd behavior can indeed rise from a process of
self-organization via local alignment mechanics, reflective perhaps of a
world-embodied Gestalt of common fate which the human visual system is
sensitive to. My dissertation studies, as outlined below, demonstrate a
long and careful history of methodological empirical investigation
paired with model development, and the simulation of real world crowd
behavior.

Sections B. and C. make up my six dissertation experiments and are
presented in summary here. Components of Section A. were started by a
previous PhD student in the lab, and finished by me (analysis,
simulation, and model enhancement) outside of my dissertation work.

In all my experiments, because we are interested in the most basic of
coordinative behaviors, the instructions given to participants in
virtual reality studies were simply "Walk with the crowd and treat them
as though they are real people". This made is to that we got as close to
natural crowd walking (which sometimes looked like crowd following)
behavior as possible. Under different task constraints, the observed
interactions would likely change; but this is an empirical question.

A. To develop an accurate model of human crowd behavior is
self-organized, one must understand the local interaction rules of an
individual pedestrian. The first step in this process, is characterizing
the zone of influence of an individual pedestrian within a crowd. The
first steps of my graduate career were to compare two potential
neighborhood models which are common in the collective motion
literature: 1. A metric model, where neighborhood influence decays with
distance, and 2. A topological model, where neighbor influence is
independent of distance. By manipulating density in three different
experiments (two virtual reality, and one real human "swarm), we were
able to determine with whether a human crowd model should use a metric
or a topological neighborhood, where metric neighborhoods are sensitive
to density manipulations, but topological ones are not. Our results
reveal that participants were sensitive to density across all three
experiments, consistent with the metric hypothesis. However, the data
are better explained by a visual model based on optical velocity and
visual occlusion, both of which depend on metric distance. We conclude
that the neighborhood of interaction in human crowds is metric, not
topological, a natural consequence of the laws of optics. (Wirth,
Dachner, Rio & Warren, in prep; Wirth & Warren, VSS 2016; Wirth, Dachner
& Warren, VSS 2018)

B. With an understanding of the shape of an individual pedestrian's
neighborhood, the next step -- and the first component of my
dissertation work -- was to investigate the statistics of neighbor
movement which elicited coordination from a participant; i.e., how is a
pedestrian recruited into collective motion? To achieve this, I
conducted two experiments. The first was to determine if participants
would average over "noisy neighbors", i.e. neighbors that were walking
in random directions. The second experiment determined if neighbor
alignment (pocketed within noisy crowds) would serve as the positive
feedback loop necessary for recruitment into coordinative motion. The
"noisy neighbors" experiment demonstrated that participant do indeed
average over neighbors walking in disparate directions, as long as the
neighbors are within the "neighborhood". The second recruitment study
confirmed that as subsets of a crowd become more aligned, they become
more attractive to a pedestrian, establishing the framework for
self-organized recruitment into collective motion for human crowds
(Wirth & Warren, VSS 2017; Wirth & Warren, in prep).

C. Now, with a combined understanding from both A and B, we know that a
human pedestrian neighborhood should be metric, and that within that
neighborhood participants average over "noisy neighbors" but are also
attracted to an aligned subset within a large crowd. To understand the
dynamics of this behavior, it became critical to investigate at what
point averaging behavior breaks down, i.e., is there a point when
walking with a crowd when a neighbors heading is so divergent, that they
will be completely ignored? Through a series of virtual reality
experiments, I was able to determine that participants tend to average
over two groups of completely aligned neighbors out to an angular
difference of around 60°. At this point, competing goal dynamics emerge,
where pedestrians are likely to follow the larger group, but once crowds
start to turn too far (\>100°), pedestrians will follow the smaller of
the two groups, preferring to walk closer to their initial heading. The
findings from this second portion of my dissertation have resulted in
notable model improvements, where we have implemented competing goal
dynamics into our crowd model. (Wirth, Free, & Warren, in prep).

**B. Training Goals and Objectives**

My research experience thus far has positioned me has set me on a path
toward achieving my long term career goal of becoming a tenure track
professor at a research university studying perception and action. This
proposal critically pivots from my research conducted during my graduate
career back toward the intrapersonal coordination I became so fascinated
with as an undergraduate student: understanding the necessary synergetic
relationship between sensory and motor neuroscience. This training plan
provides me with the opportunities to learn and acquire the skills that
I need to become the scientist I desire to be. I am thrilled to start my
post-doctoral training in the study of the visuo-locomotor system at
Northeastern University, where the ideal interdisciplinary environment
exists by inherently within the in-house expertise at Northeastern. With
talented co-sponsors with esteemed expertise in both sensory and motor
neuroscience, along with my selected sponsor, a world expert at
measuring the visual control of locomotion in both laboratory and real
world settings, I will have the necessary support to achieve the
training aims that we have agreed upon.

[Training Objective 1: Visual Neuroscience]{.underline}

*Background*. As is part of the dual nature of the multidisciplinary
research I have proposed, I will develop appropriate scientific
background in visual neuroscience required to maximize the theoretical
impact of the research I have proposed and communicate my findings
effectively. I will grow my basic understanding of visual neuroscience
by auditing a course or two taught by my Co-Sponsor, Dr. Peter Bex, in
the psychology department (e.g., Proseminar in Sensation, Proseminar in
Perception). To enhance my understanding of neural modeling, I will plan
on engaging with the online Neuromatch summer conference in 2021, where
I will have the opportunity to explore mechanisms of the visual cortex
and superior colliculus as they relate to the data I have collected in
my first experiment. In addition to courses and conference, Dr. Bex has
a vision science journal club that I will plan on attending with some
regularity, even leading a meeting or two as I become a greater fixture
at Northeastern myself. Finally, regular annual visits to VSS will
supplement and cement my learning and exposure to the hottest ideas in
the visual neuroscience community.

*Methods, tools & skills*. One of the most critical components of my
training in visual neuroscience is my familiarization and mastery of
using the mobile binocular eye tracker (Pupil Labs). Dr. Jonathan
Matthis is a world expert in the visual control of foot placement,
having recently conducted and reported one of the most advanced studies
of visuo-locomotor behavior observed in natural unconstrained
environments. During Aim 1 of this proposal, I will be mentored in the
recording, segmentation, and analysis of eye movements made during
locomotion across our laboratory space. I will receive specific
instruction on the implementation and calibration of mobile eye
trackers, learning the proper placement and orientation of cameras
needed to get clean images of the eye during motion. In Aim 2, I will
continue to gain training in the use of mobile eye tracking in our
laboratory space, but I will be encouraged to operate and conduct
research with less guidance than during Aim 1 -- providing myself the
space to fully master this technique. Finally, in Aim 3, I will be more
directly mentored again as we move from the laboratory space to using
the eye tracker outside, which comes with its own unique challenges of
which Dr. Matthis is well versed.

*Analysis*. My training in the analysis and segmentation of eye
movements, as well as the mapping of gaze in 3-D space (as described in
Aims 1 and 2) will be spearheaded by Dr. Matthis, where he will instruct
me in one on one meeting and coding sessions. I will receive specific
instruction in computational video analysis techniques in both Matlab
and Python versions of the Open Computer Vision (OpenCV) toolbox. While
this is Dr. Matthis's area of expertise, his tutelage will be
supplemented by faculty across Northeastern, such as my co-sponsor Dr.
Peter Bex and experts outside of the Department of Psychology, like Dr.
Ennio Mingolla (the head of the Computational Vision Laboratory in the
Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders).

[Training Objective 2: Motor Neuroscience]{.underline}

*Background.* On the other side of the perception and action coin, I
will receive training in motor neuroscience and motor control, such that
I am able to adequately implement models of human locomotion to generate
foot-steps predictions which are vital to my hypotheses. While Dr.
Matthis has extensive experience in studying the biomechanics of
locomotion and will be the primary mentor for me in this space, his
guidance will be matched by my co-sponsor Dr. Dagmar Sternad, a renowned
expert in motor control. I have already established a professional
relationship with Dr. Sternad, having made it a priority throughout
graduate school to attend her Boston-famous Boston Action Club
throughout the past two years of my graduate training. Her excitement
and passion for this project gives me great confidence that with her
guidance and expertise, that I will have the instruction required to
develop a detailed understanding of motor neuroscience during the length
of the proposal. I plan on joining Dr. Sternad's lab meetings upon
occasion, continue to participate in her Action Club seminar, as well as
audit her course *Interdisciplinary approaches in motor control*. This
exposure, supplemented with information I will gather at relevant
conferences to motor neuroscience (SFN, AMAM, and Dynamic Walking) will
provide me a strong foundation for understanding motor neuroscience as I
mature as a scientist.

*Methods, tools & skills*. Just as critical as the eye tracking
expertise will be the experience I get in the recording of full body
biomechanical motion capture. While I already have expertise with the
analysis and recording of rigid body motion capture data (head positions
of individuals in a crowd), I do not have the experience necessary to
map out the musculoskeletal system. This training again will be
spearheaded by Dr. Matthis who is an expert in mapping the
musculoskeletal system with marker based motion capture (Qualisys),
IMU-based motion capture (Shadow), and markerless motion capture
(OpenPose). I will receive training in all three of these motion capture
techniques, and Dr. Matthis will provide one on one training sessions in
the analysis of this sort of biomechanical data. Additionally, Dr.
Matthis's lab is equipped with force plates that are in the floor and
can be specifically incorporated into our experimental design (Exp. 1 &
2). Hence, I will also build my full body kinematic (motion capture) and
kinetic (force plate) data recording expertise such that I can
characterize low-level mechanical aspects of human movement, such as the
join torques that facilitate locomotion.

*Analysis.* My training in the analysis of full body kinematics and
force plate kinetic data will be led by Dr. Matthis and supplemented by
Dr. Sternad. My training from Training Objective 1 will come together
with my training in this objective, where I will combine the eye
tracking data to reconstruct subject body-relative gaze behavior (Aims 1
and 2), such that we can map motion and gaze in the 3-D world. The
training I will receive in the laboratory (Aims 1 and 2) will be
instrumental to be able to map the more complex 3-D behavior in Aim 3. I
will also gain experience in the implementation of basic models of
locomotion (Kuo, 2002) such that we can generate predictions of foot
placement in our experimental settings. This training will again be led
by Dr. Matthis and supported by Dr. Sternad, who has extensive
experience in the modeling of motor behavior.

[Training Objective 3: Professional Development Toward Independent
Research]{.underline}

The final, but critical training objective is the professional
development that I will need to become a competitive tenure-track
faculty applicant by the end of the grant period. To achieve this, I
will plan to communicate my scientific findings by writing high-quality
peer-reviewed journal articles and presenting at major conferences,
spanning visual and motor neuroscience. The quality of oral
presentations will be workshopped in internal lab meetings, one on one
meetings, and meetings with my co-sponsors and their respective labs
when appropriate. By regularly attending and presenting at conferences
in vision science (e.g., VSS) and motor neuroscience (e.g., Dynamic
Walking) I will become professionally recognized within both aspects of
the interdisciplinary research with which I am studying.

Additionally, I will be provided opportunities to guest lecture in
perception and action, my area of established expertise, as well as
mentor incoming graduate students, current and incoming co-op students,
and undergraduate researchers. These opportunities, along with
participation in workshops related to responsible conduct of research
and diversity and inclusiveness in science workshops will be critical to
my formation as a member of the academic community.

This training will satisfy my personal long term career goals by
providing the necessary insights into both visual and motor
neuroscience, such that I can build a career explaining the critical
connections that exist between the two systems. Together, these three
training objectives will provide me with the interdisciplinary expertise
I need to transition to my next professional phase as a competitive
applicant for tenure track positions for experts in perception and
action.

**C. Activities Planned Under this Award**

For all three years of the award period, I will devote 80% of my time to
scientific research, methods training, and writing. The remainder of
time will be spent improving my written and oral communication skills,
my knowledge of visual and motor neuroscience, attending journal clubs,
talk seminars, and conferences, participating in responsible conduce of
research workshops, and improving my teaching and mentoring skills.

As stated in Objective 3, attending a variety of conferences, investing
time in mentorship and teaching, and honing my scientific communication
skills are vital to my career goals of becoming a promising academic job
candidate.

The chronological order of activities including conferences to attend,
courses to audit, and experiments to complete are outlined in the
*Proposal Timeline* on the next page.

**\
Proposal Timeline**

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Year 1**                                                                                        
  -------------- ------- ------- -------- ------------------------- ------- ------- ------- ------- --
  **Activity**                   **% of   **Details/Description**                                   
                                 Time**                                                             

  Coursework and                 5%       Audit one of the                                          
  External                                following courses, or                                     
  Training                                similar: Proseminar                                       
                                          Perception, Proseminar                                    
                                          Sensation. Take                                           
                                          Neurmoatch Summer Course                                  
                                          (Training Obj. 1).                                        
                                          Continue RCR training                                     
                                          (Training Obj. 3).                                        

                                                                                                    

                                                                                                    

                                                                                                    

  Conferences                    5%       Present at 2-3 major                                      
                                          meetings: VSS, AMAM, or                                   
                                          Dynamic Walking. Attend                                   
                                          relevant small workshops.                                 
                                          (Training Objectives 1, 2                                 
                                          and 3)                                                    

                                                                                                    

                                                                                                    

  Internal                       5%       Biweekly lab meetings in                                  
  Training and                            sponsor\'s lab as well as                                 
  Advisement                              independent reports.                                      
                                          Occasional lab meetins in                                 
                                          co-sponsor labs. Biannual                                 
                                          progress meetings with                                    
                                          both sponsor and                                          
                                          co-sponsors. (Training                                    
                                          Obj. 3)                                                   

                                                                                                    

                                                                                                    

                                                                                                    

  Mentoring and                  5%       Mentor co-op students,                                    
  Teaching                                undergraduate students,                                   
                                          and graudate students in                                  
                                          the lab. Occasional guest                                 
                                          lectures. (Training Obj.                                  
                                          3)                                                        

                                                                                                    

  Scientific                     70%      Finalize design for                                       
  Research                                Exp. 1. Collect Exp. 1.                                   
                                          Analyze Exp. 1.                                           

  Scientific                     10%      Complete & submit                                         
  Writing                                 manuscript for Exp 1.                                     
                                          Revise & resubmit as                                      
                                          needed.                                                   

                                                                                                    

                                                                                                    

  **Year 2**                                                                                        

  **Activity**                   **% of   **Details/Description**                                   
                                 Time**                                                             

  Coursework and                 5%       Audit the following                                       
  External                                course, or similar:                                       
  Training                                Interdisciplinary                                         
                                          approaches in motor                                       
                                          control (Training Obj.                                    
                                          2). Continue RCR training                                 
                                          (Training Obj. 3).                                        

                                                                                                    

                                                                                                    

                                                                                                    

  Conferences                    5%       Present at 2 major                                        
                                          meetings: VSS and SFN.                                    
                                          Attend relevant small                                     
                                          workshops. (Training                                      
                                          Objectives 1, 2 and 3).                                   

                                                                                                    

                                                                                                    

  Internal                       5%       Similar to Year 1.                                        
  Training and                                                                                      
  Advisement                                                                                        

  Mentoring and                  5%       Similar to Year 1.                                        
  Teaching                                                                                          

  Scientific                     70%      Finalize design for Exp.                                  
  Research                                2. Collect Exp. 2.                                        
                                          Analyze Exp. 2.                                           

  Scientific                     10%      Complete & submit                                         
  Writing                                 manuscript for Exp 2.                                     
                                          Revise & resubmit as                                      
                                          needed.                                                   

                                                                                                    

                                                                                                    

  **Year 3**                                                                                        

  **Activity**                   **% of   **Details/Description**                                   
                                 Time**                                                             

  Conferences                    5%       Present at 2-3 major                                      
                                          meetings: VSS, SicB, or                                   
                                          Dynamic Walking. Attend                                   
                                          relevant small workshops.                                 
                                          (Training Objectives 1, 2                                 
                                          and 3)                                                    

                                                                                                    

                                                                                                    

  Internal                       5%       Similar to Year 1.                                        
  Training and                                                                                      
  Advisement                                                                                        

  Mentoring and                  5%       Similar to Year 1.                                        
  Teaching                                                                                          

  Scientific                     70%      Finalize design for Exp.                                  
  Research                                3. Collect Exp. 3.                                        
                                          Analyze Exp. 3.                                           

  Scientific                     10%      Complete & submit                                         
  Writing                                 manuscript for Exp 3.                                     
                                          Revise & resubmit as                                      
                                          needed.                                                   

                                                                                                    

  Career                         5%       Apply for faculty                                         
  Development                             positions. (Training Obj.                                 
                                          3)                                                        
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
