OMB No. 0925-0001 and 0925-0002 (Rev. 03/2020 Approved Through
02/28/2023)

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

Provide the following information for the Senior/key personnel and other
significant contributors.\
Follow this format for each person. **DO NOT EXCEED FIVE PAGES.**

NAME: Trenton D. Wirth

eRA COMMONS USER NAME (credential, e.g., agency login): WIRTHTD

POSITION TITLE: PhD Candidate

EDUCATION/TRAINING *(Begin with baccalaureate or other initial
professional education, such as nursing, include postdoctoral training
and residency training if applicable. Add/delete rows as necessary.)*

+-------------------------+---------+--------+--------+---------------+
| INSTITUTION AND         | DEGREE  | Start  | Comp   | FIELD OF      |
| LOCATION                |         | Date   | letion | STUDY         |
|                         | *(if    |        | Date   |               |
|                         | appli   | M      |        |               |
|                         | cable)* | M/YYYY | M      |               |
|                         |         |        | M/YYYY |               |
+=========================+=========+========+========+===============+
| University of           | B.A.    | 0      | 0      | Philosophy    |
| Cincinnati, Cincinnati, |         | 8/2011 | 4/2014 |               |
| Ohio                    |         |        |        |               |
+-------------------------+---------+--------+--------+---------------+
| University of           | B.S.    | 0      | 0      | Psychology    |
| Cincinnati, Cincinnati, |         | 8/2011 | 4/2014 |               |
| Ohio                    |         |        |        |               |
+-------------------------+---------+--------+--------+---------------+
| Brown University,       | Ph.D.   | 0      | Ex     | Cognitive     |
| Providence, Rhode       |         | 8/2014 | pected | Science       |
| Island                  |         |        |        |               |
|                         |         |        | 0      |               |
|                         |         |        | 9/2020 |               |
+-------------------------+---------+--------+--------+---------------+

: Education and Training TableEnter your institution name and location,
degree (if applicable), start date, end date (or expected end date), and
field of study.

**A. Personal Statement**

It is my long term career goal to develop expertise exploring the
nuanced connections of human perception and action, providing basic
science insights that have real world impact. My interest in perception
and action systems stems back to my training as an undergraduate at the
University of Cincinnati, where I conducted a senior thesis under Dr.
Michael Riley studying the connection between auditory localization
tasks and postural control. My passion for the study of perception and
action led me to Brown University, where I began my investigation into
the complex interpersonal system of human crowds. With the guidance of
my advisor, Dr. William Warren, I have spent the past six years becoming
an expert in the study of complex systems that manifest within human
perception and action problems. My dissertation work has focused on
applying theories and methods from behavioral dynamics, synergetics,
psychophysics, and animal collective behavior to establish an
understanding of how coordination in human crowds manifests by a process
of self-organization; where the local perceptual interactions between
individuals and their neighbors gives rise to complex behavior. In my
time at Brown University, I have taken coursework in visual perception,
perception and action, cognitive science, spatial navigation,
experimental design, and regression analysis. My experimental training
has made me an expert in implementing a data-driven three-pronged
approach to study complex systems: experimentation in Virtual Reality,
model development and simulation of behavior, and real-world behavioral
observation. It is my belief that this same system, regularly applied to
understanding collective motion, can also be applied to developing a
holistic understanding of the visuo-locomotor system.

My scientific background has prepared me to conduct the proposed
research that I will be pursuing as an incoming post-doctoral associate
in Dr. Jonathan Matthis' Human Movement Neuroscience Lab. In this space,
I will establish a foundation for my long term career goals directly by
developing the skills and knowledge required to study the
visuo-locomotor system, combining methods and insights from visual and
motor neuroscience. As a recipient of the NRSA Fellowship, I would be
empowered to continue my passion for mentorship and my history of
grantsmanship, establishing a foundation from which to build my career
that will reflect the values I hold as an emerging scientist. What is
presented in this application is a proposal that both pushes the
boundaries of our understanding of how perception and action influence
one another, but also provides me with the resources and training from
Dr. Matthis and my co-sponsors at Northeastern University necessary to
achieve my ambitious career goals.

**B. Positions and Honors**

**[Positions and Employment]{.underline}**

2020- (Incoming) Postdoctoral Research Associate, Biology Department,
Northeastern University

**[Other Experience and Training]{.underline}**

2012-2014 Research Assistant, Psychology Department, University of
Cincinnati

2014-2020 Graduate Student, Department of Cognitive, Linguistic and
Psychological Sciences,

Brown University

**[Awards and Honors]{.underline}**

2014 Research Assistant of the Year, Psychology Department, University
of Cincinnati

2014 B.A. Philosophy, *Summa Cum Laude*, College of Arts and Sciences,
University of Cincinnati

2014 B.S. Psychology, *Cum Laude*, College of Arts and Sciences,
University of Cincinnati

2018 Hyundai Visionary Challenge, Brown University, Award Recipient-

*Pedestrians to Pilots*: using virtual reality as a tool for 3D human
navigation

2019-2020 Link Foundation: Modeling, Simulation & Training Fellowship

**[Memberships]{.underline}**

2011-2014 Psi Chi, International Honor Society in Psychology

2015- Vision Sciences Society

2016- International Society of Ecological Psychology

**\
C. Contributions to Science**

1.  To develop an accurate model of human crowd behavior is
    self-organized, one must understand the local interaction rules of
    an individual pedestrian. The first step in this process, is
    characterizing the zone of influence of an individual pedestrian
    within a crowd. The first steps of my graduate career were to
    compare two potential neighborhood models which are common in the
    collective motion literature: 1. A metric model, where neighborhood
    influence decays with distance, and 2. A topological model, where
    neighbor influence is independent of distance. By manipulating
    density in three different experiments (two in virtual reality, and
    within a real human "swarm), we were able to determine with whether
    a human crowd model should use a metric or a topological
    neighborhood, where metric neighborhoods are sensitive to density
    manipulations, but topological ones are not. Our results reveal that
    participants were sensitive to density across all three experiments,
    consistent with the metric hypothesis. However, the data are better
    explained by a visual model based on optical velocity and visual
    occlusion, both of which depend on metric distance. We conclude that
    the neighborhood of interaction in human crowds is metric, not
    topological, a natural consequence of the laws of optics.

    a.  Wirth, T.D., Warren, W.H., (2016). The visual neighborhood in
        human crowds: Metric vs. topological hypothesis. Poster
        presented at Vision Sciences Society, St. Pete's Beach Florida.

    b.  Wirth, T.D., Dachner, G.C., & Warren, W.H., (2018). Metric vs.
        topological models of collective motion in human crowds. Poster
        presented at Vision Sciences Society, St. Pete's Beach Florida.

    c.  Wirth T.D., Dachner G.C., Rio, KR. & Warren, W.H., (in
        preparation). The neighborhood of interaction in human crowds is
        metric, not topological, due to the laws of optics.

2.  The self-organization of human crowds relies on the coordination of
    neighbors within the crowd. How is a pedestrian recruited into
    coordinative motion? To answer this question, I conducted two
    experiments. The first was to determine if participants would
    average over "noisy neighbors", i.e. neighbors that were walking in
    random directions. The second experiment determined if neighbor
    alignment (pocketed within noisy crowds) would serve as the positive
    feedback loop necessary for recruitment into coordinative motion.
    The "noisy neighbors" experiment demonstrated that participant do
    indeed average over neighbors walking in disparate directions, as
    long as the neighbors are within the "neighborhood". The second
    recruitment study confirmed that as subsets of a crowd become more
    aligned, they become more attractive to a pedestrian, establishing
    the framework for self-organized recruitment into collective motion
    for human crowds.

    a.  Wirth, T.D. & Warren, W.H., (2017). Recruitment of pedestrians
        into collective crowd motion. Poster presented at Vision
        Sciences Society, St. Pete's Beach Florida.

    b.  Wirth, T.D. & Warren, W.H., (in preparation). Self-organization
        in human crowds: Recruitment into collective motion.

3.  Studies have shown that humans demonstrate the robust ability to
    average over "noisy neighbors" when walking with a crowd, but that
    they are also attracted to coherent subsets within large crowds. At
    what point does a pedestrian's tendency to average over their
    neighbors transition into decision making between subgroups of
    neighbors? Through a series of four virtual reality experiments, I
    was able to determine that participants tend to average over two
    groups of completely aligned neighbors out to an angular difference
    in heading of around 60° - without spatial separation, meaning that
    the two turn groups are always spatially present. At this point,
    competing goal dynamics emerge. With competing goals (the goals
    being two turn groups), pedestrians are likely to follow the larger
    group, but once crowds start to turn too far (\>100°), pedestrians
    will follow the smaller of the two groups, preferring to walk closer
    to their initial heading. The findings have resulted in notable
    model improvements, where we have implemented competing goal
    dynamics into our crowd model.

    a.  Wirth, T.D. & Warren, W.H., (2019). Collective Decision Making
        in Human Crowds:  Majority Rule Emerges from Local Averaging.
        Talk presented at Vision Sciences Society, St. Pete's Beach
        Florida.

    b.  Wirth, T.D. & Warren, W.H., (in preparation). Self-organization
        in human crowds: transition from averaging to decision making
        behavior for individual pedestrians.

    c.  Wirth, T.D., Free, B. & Warren, W.H., (in preparation).
        Self-organization in human crowds: Competing goal dynamics in
        human crowds.

**\
\
D. Additional Information: Research Support and/or Scholastic
Performance\
\
**

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  YEAR       COURSE TITLE                                          GRADE
  ---------- ----------------------------------------------------- -------
                                                                   

                                                                   

             GRADUATE COURSES: BROWN UNIVERSITY                    

                                                                   

  2014       Ecological Approach to Perception & Action            A

  2014       Graduate Proseminar                                   A

  2014       Experimental Design                                   B

  2015       Visualizing Vision                                    B

  2015       Core Topics in Perception                             A

  2015       Spatial Cognition                                     A

  2016       Core Topics in Cognition                              B

  2016       Applied Regression Analysis                           B

  2016       Perceiving and Acting in 3D                           A

  2016       Core Topics in Language                               A
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Brown University courses can either be taken for a letter grade
(A/B/C/No Credit) or for a grade of Satisfactory (S) or Unsatisfactory
(U).
