#### Data and Safety Monitoring Plan

Data and safety monitoring will be performed by the applicant, under the
guidance of Prof. Matthis. All subject identifiers will be removed from
the data. Electronic data will be maintained in digital format stored
without subject identifiers and only with the individual study ID
number. Copies of the data will be stored in a locked cabinet and on a
secure large storage capacity data server, through which only authorized
personnel will be permitted entry. Only the PI and other approved
personnel working with the PI on this study will have access to the
de-identified data. All unpublished data will be kept for a minimum of
five years. Published data will be hosted by reputable online services
that provides an official DOI for each item (e.g. Figshare, Mendeley
Data).

**Types of Data**

The primary data generated by this research will consist of digitally
sampled time histories of continuous physical measurements, including
motions and forces. Kinematic data will be sampled at 300 Hz (minimum).
Preliminary experiments indicate that the primary data generated by a
single experimental session may occupy roughly 1GB of storage space (not
including video). Videos will be encoded in H.265 (.mp4) format when
possible, adapting appropriately as video encoding standards progress.

Secondary data generated by this research will consist of details of
experimental subjects and the progress of an experiment (date, time,
duration, equipment calibration and date, unusual circumstances). With
the exception of subject identity as described above, these secondary
data will initially be recorded in laboratory notebooks of the
responsible investigator. Subsequently they will be transcribed to
digital format and associated with the primary data.

Meaningful use of the primary data depends on the associated secondary
data. Metadata generated from those sources will include statistical and
time-series analyses (primarily performed using Matlab, Python, and/or
R). These metadata may take any of several forms, including tables,
graphical objects, animations and real-time interactive simulations.

**Data Storage and Security**

Data generated by the acquisition systems used in this research
(specifically motion acquisition) will initially be recorded in native
instrument binary format. For analysis, it will subsequently converted
to MATLAB compatible "mat" format. After quality control, primary and
secondary data will be converted to "ascii" format for long-term
storage. We have chosen "ascii" format as it is the most long-lived and
stable data format known to the investigators.

Metadata will be stored in native binary format and, where practical,
will also be converted to "ascii" format for storage. However, this is
undesirable and infeasible for some classes of metadata, including
animations and real-time simulations.

All data generated will initially be stored on lab computers in the
participating institutions. Short-term data backup will be performed at
least weekly. Long-term backup of all data will be performed using
Northeastern's secure online backup service. Access to long-term data
will be by using standard password procedures.

**Data Sharing**

Data will be made publicly available only after they have passed
stringent internal quality control procedures. Quality control will be
based on the extensive prior experience of Professor Matthis. The
primary purpose of quality control is to: (i) ensure internal
consistency of each dataset; (ii) eliminate the likelihood of data
corruption due to equipment malfunction or unacceptable deviation from
experimental procedure; and (iii) ensure the appropriateness and
validity of any meta-analyses. An essential element of quality control
will be review of data by presentation to both research groups. We
therefore anticipate that a period of up to six months may be required
for satisfactory quality control.

We anticipate that the data captured and created by the proposed
research will be of broad interest to communities engaged in research on
human motor behavior and its clinical applications. Once they have
passed the quality control procedures outlined above, data generated by
this research project will be made publicly accessible by posting to
reputable online services that provide DOIs for hosted items.
