**DESCRIPTION OF INSTITUTIONAL ENVIRONMENT AND COMMITMENT TO TRAINING**

**Sponsor's Institution & Lab: Northeastern University**

Northeastern is a rapidly growing national research university, with
1,346 full-time faculty and over 550 new tenured and tenure-track hires
since 2006. The university is home to over 50 interdisciplinary research
centers and institutes, and fosters a collaborative research environment
across experts in a variety of disciplines including psychology,
computer and information science, public health, basic and applied
biological sciences, engineering, and clinical science. The College of
Science (COS) has 216 full-time faculty, 586 graduate students across 10
departments and programs.

Situated in Boston, Massachusetts, Northeastern's collaborative
environment is reinforced by its proximity to several major institutions
including Harvard, MIT, U. Mass Boston, and Boston University. The
greater Boston area is also home to several medical campuses and
professional schools (e.g., Harvard Medical School, Boston Children's
Hospital, Massachusetts General Hospital, Massachusetts Eye and Ear
Infirmary, New England College of Optometry, Schepens Eye Research
Institute). Together, the research faculty, postdocs and students at
these institutions form one of the largest and most successful networks
of clinical and basic vision scientists in the world. In addition,
Northeastern provides its students, faculty, and postdocs with state-
of-the art computing and research facilities, including access to a
high-performance computing cluster housed in the Massachusetts Green
High Performance Computing Center (MGHPCC).

*Faculty:*

Members of the sponsor's laboratory frequently interact and collaborate
with various faculty and experts in other Northeastern departments,
including Drs. Peter Bex (Psychology), Dagmar Sternad (Biology &
Engineering), Rhea Eskew (Psychology), Adam Reeves (Psychology), Ennio
Mingolla (College of Health Sciences), Sandra Shefelbine
(Bioengineering), Taskin Padir (Mechanical), Josh Stefanik (Physical
Therapy), and others.

*Facilities:*

The sponsor's lab includes ample space and equipment for conducting the
proposed work, including over 3000 ft2 of laboratory testing space,
including a wide array of cutting edge equipment for the study of human
movement (see Equipment, Facilities & Other Resources for full
descriptions).

*Meetings, seminars, and courses:*

*\
*Internal training in the sponsor's laboratory includes a primary lab
meeting held once a week. In addition, the application will participate
in the Boston Action Club (organized by Dagmar Sternad) and the
Northeastern Vision Club (organized by Peter Bex). The applicant will
also be encouraged to attend the wide array of talks and seminars that
occur within Northeastern and the Greater Boston Area. The sponsor also
meets individually with each member at least once a week to review
progress in data collection, analysis, and to provide feedback in
manuscript preparation.

*Courses and Workshops:*

At a university level, there are several courses relevant to the
proposed research and training under this fellowship, including courses
in the Psychology, Biology, and Bio Engineering (e.g., Biol 5601:
*Interdisciplinary Approaches in Motor Control,* PSYC 5130: *Proseminar
in Perception*). In addition, the Office of Research Development hosts
regular workshops on grant and manuscript preparation and Northeastern's
Center for Advancing Teaching and Learning Through Research (CATLR)
organizes regular workshops on issues related to teaching and
mentorship, as well as an annual teaching conference.
