**Facilities & Other Resources**

**Laboratory:**

All experimental studies with healthy human subjects will take place in
the BIG lab shared by Dr Jonathan Matthis and Josh Stefanik located in
Richards Hall at Northeastern University. Housed in Richards Hall on
Northeastern's main campus, the Action Lab has an approximate space of
over 3,100 sqft dedicated to the study of full-body human movement. This
lab has state-of-the-art 31-camera Qualisys motion capture system
providing over 140m^2^ of usable full-body capture volume within a 7.6m
x 18.5m area, 5 AMTI 400600 force plates, and a FLOAT multi-directional
active bodyweight support system, a Bertec instrumented spilt treadmill,
several Pupil Labs mobile eye trackers and a Delsys wireless EMG system.
The labspace also includes a lockable exam room that be used for
confidential converstations and secure storage of sensitive documents.

**Technical Support:**

Northeastern's computer network and servers are administrated by a
central help desk that is freely available to faculty and student.
Site-licensed software includes MATLAB for mathematical analysis,
LabView for real-time data acquisition and control plus numerous other
software packages. Due to on the co-sponsor's (Dr. Sternad) joint
appointment in Electrical and Computer Engineering and in Physics, she
has access to the workshops in these departments. A machine shop with
specialization in electronics is available for support in designing
customized experimental set-ups.

All experimental activities within the laboratories are monitored for
Human Subjects and Biosafety requirements by Northeastern's Office of
Regulatory Compliance.

**Scientific Environment:**

The Action Lab at Northeastern is a state-of-the-art facility provided
by Northeastern University in 2008 when the university made a
significant commitment to research in motor neuroscience. This
commitment is reinforced by additional programs and initiatives at the
university, most prominently the PhD program in the newly founded
Department of Bioengineering, with Neural Control and Neuroengineering.
Further, Dr. Matthis assists with the organization of an
inter-institutional seminar series, the Boston Action Club, supported by
the College of Science and founded by Dr Sternad, which regularly brings
together researchers from the Boston area setting a platform for
collaborative exchange.

Dr. Matthis works closely with Dr. Sternad, whose lab houses the virtual
environment with a large backprojection screen and the robot arm. The
lab is also equipped with a 12-camera system for 3D motion capture
(Qualisys), 2 AMTI force plates, and wireless EMG system with 16 sensors
(Myon), and many other smaller pieces of equipment like accelerometers,
goniometers, etc. In addition, there is equipment for brain measurement
and stimulation such as Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) with a
brain navigation system, a 128-channel EEG system (Biosemi), and a
Transcranial Direct Current System (tDCS). Dr. Sternad's lab group
currently comprises 4 postdocs with a background in Robotics,
Neuroscience, and Biomedical Engineering, 3 graduate students pursuing
PhDs in Bioengineering and Electrical and Mechanical Engineering, and 4
undergraduate students from Behavioral Neuroscience and Bioengineering.
Shared lab meetings between the Matthis and Sternad labs will provide
the applicant with an opportunity to gain experience working in a large,
established lab as a counterpoint to working on developing a new lab
with his primary advisor, Dr Matthis.

In addition, the applicant will attached weekly meetings of the
Northeastern Vision Club with Dr. Peter Bex (co-sponsor) and other
Notheastern Faculty, including Dr. Ennio Mingola and Dr Rhea Eskew.
These meetings will help the applicant gain experience with classical
vision science, and help to situation him within the larger intellectual
community of Boston.
