**Project Summary**

Visual search plays a necessary role in the guidance of locomotor foot
placement, particularly when walking across rough terrain where
potential footholds are limited, and potentially hard to find. While
there is a great deal of research investigating visual search and the
biomechanics of locomotion independently, there is a gap in our
understanding of their critical overlap. Visual search of natural
environments has been shown to be highly fixation efficient and task
specific, such that we might expect visual search during locomotion to
incorporate the biomechanics of locomotion when making fixation
efficient eye movements. A basic science understanding of the how visual
search is influenced by biomechanical constraints will provide the
foundation necessary for understanding how complex visuo-locomotor
behavior might be affected by retinal and motor diseases. Therefore, the
first goal of this project is to measure both the impact of locomotor
task dependency (Aim 1) and visual search difficulty (Aim 2) on the
utilization of biomechanical information during visual search for
footholds. The second goal of this project is to conduct high quality
measurements visuo-locomotor behavior in natural terrains,
reconstructing the 3-D environment and mapping visual search and
locomotor behaviors in 3-D space with high precision, paying close
attention to how the preferred biomechanics might inform visual search
behavior in the natural world.

Northeastern University provides an excellent interdisciplinary training
environment required to fulfill the aims of this proposal. By combining
the expertise from co-sponsors in visual neuroscience and motor
neuroscience with the unique expertise of the sponsor -- a world expert
in the measurement of the visuo-locomotor system and the visual control
of foot placement --, I will receive the training necessary to achieve
the aims proposed.

This proposal will establish a new paradigm observing visuo-locomotor
behavior in a large indoor laboratory space. In this paradigm, we will
combine a 14x3m walkable Augmented Reality display with binocular eye
tracking and full body kinematic motion capture to measure the
visuo-locomotor system in unprecedented detail. Additionally, we will
combine insights gleaned from laboratory experiments (Aims 1 and 2) with
outdoor observation of natural visuo-locomotor behavior (Aim 3), testing
the influence of biomechanical information in both controlled and
unconstrained environments. The described research will lay the
foundation for a better understanding of the connections between visual
and motor neuroscience, and will provide a path for a career spent
exploring complex perception and action systems.
