**Risks to Human Subjects**

*Human Subject Involvement, Characteristics, and Design*

The proposal involves human subjects recruited from the Northeastern
University community. There are no selection criteria except normal or
corrected-to-normal vision and no motor impairments. There are no
predictions in the design of the experiment relative to gender or
ethnicity, so we will do our best to recruit participants which reflect
the general population, sampling the diverse ethnic and gender
backgrounds of students at Northeastern University.

Testing will take place in either Dr. Matthis's laboratory (Aims 1-2;
the BIG lab) at Northeastern University, or in a to be determined
outdoor location (Aim 3, such as the Blue Hills Preserve, Milton MA).
Participants will be recruited through word of mouth and on-campus
fliers, in compliance with our IRB protocol.

*Study Procedures, Materials, and Potential Risks*

Data will be collected either within the tracking space in the BIG lab
(14x3m Augmented Reality walking space), where participants will wear a
mobile eye tracker and a full body motion capture maker suit, or outside
in to-be-determined locations which will be scouted prior to the
experiment (e.g., Blue Hills Preserve, Milton MA), where participants
will wear a mobile eye tracker, a mobile IMU-based motion capture
system, and a lightweight tablet backpack for data processing outdoors.
The identity of subjects involved in the studies will remain
confidential. Each subject will be allocated a unique identifier code,
that will be used on all electronic raw data, electronic data in
spreadsheets and to label data recorded in hard copy format. Only
research personnel in our labs, or in collaborating sites at which data
collection is performed on-­site, who have completed NIH-­mandated human
subjects training, will have access to subject identities. All records
that contain personally identifiable data will be kept in locked
cabinets at Northeastern.

The risks of these experiments are similar to those in normal behavior:
there is no additional risk to participants than would otherwise exist
walking alone on the street (Aim 1 & 2) or light hiking activity (Aim
3). There are no known risk of wearing eye trackers, motion capture
equipment, or of the Augmented Reality Projector space. In all
experiments, participants will be watched by experimenters who will be
close by in case of an unlikely emergency. For Aim 3, when collecting
data in outdoor environments, researchers will investigate the walking
space to ensure there are no hazardous places where participants might
walk, e.g. loose or wet rocks. Equipment will be inspected before
participants start their participation (in all three Aims) to ensure
that everything is fit comfortably, and secure.

**Adequacy of Protection Against Risk**

*Informed Consent and Assent*

Participants will be given a consent form prior to the start of the
experiment, including the donning of any experimental equipment.
Participants will be informed that their participation is entirely
voluntary, and if they wish to refuse participation at any time they may
do so without penalty or loss of benefits to which they are otherwise
entitled. Refusal to participate will not impact future relationships
with the Matthis lab, or any other organization within Northeastern.
Participants will be told that they can simply tell the experimenter if
they would like to stop at any point in time, and participants will be
given a copy of the consent form for their own personal records.
Participants will complete a consent form on paper, as approved by the
IRB, and the Matthis lab will keep a copy of the participant's consent
form locked up in the lab. Any questions that the participant has about
the experiment, the consent form, or their privacy, may be answered at
any point during the experiment, but they will be encouraged to ask
questions before they sign their consent form.

*Protections Against Risk*

During all three experiments (Aims 1-3), as participants will walk both
indoors and out, experimenters will be standing by and maintaining a
visual on subjects as they walk. If for any reason participants need to
take a break, they will be allowed to do so, and a break will be
implemented half-way through data collection to ensure that subjects
don't suffer from unexpected fatigue. When outdoors, drinking water for
subjects will be provided when necessary, and experimenters will
investigate outdoor terrain for any potentially hazardous terrain. The
terrain will be pre-vetted so that the walking area is known to be safe
for participants. There are no medical or professional interventions,
and there is no opportunity for incidental findings.

**Potential Benefits of The Proposed Research to The Subject and
Others**

There are no direct benefits to the participants in these studies other
than the intellectual experience and light exercise that one would
receive from walking for 1-1.5 hours. Insights gained from each aim of
this proposal however will increase our understanding of the role of
biomechanical information in visual search, thus improving our knowledge
of the visuo-locomotor system. This knowledge stands to benefit anyone
who might be suffering from a visual or motor disability or disease, as
a greater basic science understanding might pave the way for more
effective intervention or treatment. The risks involved are no greater
than participants might experience from walking alone on pavement (Aims
1 and 2) or during light hiking activity (Aim 3). Relative to the risk,
the potential benefit to others is massive, as improving our basic
science understanding of the visuo-locomotor system is critical for
potential clinical intervention in human vision as it relates to
mobility.

**Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained**

The knowledge to be gained is an understanding of the role of
biomechanical information in visual search. This will provide greater
insight into the visuo-locomotor system as a whole, potentially
providing the inspiration for more experimental work using a similar
paradigm to answer more questions about the relationship between visual
and motor neuroscience during locomotion. There is no risk to
participants that they would not experience walking alone on pavement
(Aims 1 and 2) or during light hiking (Aim 3). The knowledge to be
gained from their participation is great.
