**SELECTION OF SPONSOR AND INSTITUTION**

The research and training plan I have proposed reflects my desire to
move towards a deeper understanding of the interplay between visual and
motor neuroscience within the visuo-locomotor system. This proposal
combines my foundation in complex systems and perception and action
research with the resources available to me at Northeastern University.
I chose to begin this new stage in my career with Dr. Jonathan Matthis.
I had gotten to know Dr. Matthis by seeing him present his work at VSS
throughout my graduate career, and when I had found out that he was
starting a lab at Northeastern University, I was thrilled by the chance
to work with him. I believe that Dr. Matthis's research is in many ways
the future of vision science; his expertise in measuring natural
visuo-locomotor behavior is unparalleled and his training will be
critical for me in the pursuit of my goals. By using cutting edge
technologies to measure visual behavior in natural environments, we can
start to test hypotheses and theories that go beyond the typical grasp
of the field of vision science, and begin to understand how well
researched visual processes -- like visual search -- might be reshaped
when exposed to the task constraints of the natural world.

Dr. Matthis has over a decade of experience measuring the visual control
of foot placement, and has a strong history of communicating his
findings in high-quality research journals such as *Current Biology,
PloS One*, *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences*, and many
more. Dr. Matthis's lab space is critical for the proposed research,
combining a 14x3m Augmented Reality tracking space with Qualisys motion
capture, binocular eye tracking, and kinetic force plates built into the
floor. The paradigm that myself and my co-sponsors have developed has
benefited greatly from the state of the art technology within the lab,
and Dr. Matthis's unique expertise in using it all correctly. Despite
Dr. Matthis's lack of experience in training post-doctoral fellows, I
believe that I am to be the first of many successful scientists to pass
through Dr. Matthis's lab -- his support and guidance in the generation
of this proposal has been invaluable. To supplement his guidance, I have
selected two co-sponsors both within the Northeastern University system
to support my development with respect to both visual and motor
neuroscience: Drs. Peter Bex and Dagmar Sternad.

Dr. Bex has 23 years of experience studying binocular vision disorders
and has established an extensive collaborative network among local
clinicians in the Boston area. Dr. Bex has mentored 17 post-doctoral
associates in his academic career -- all of whom have research positions
-- and will bring critical insight into helping me plan my own career in
vision science. Dr. Bex will be able to aide in my communication to the
vision science community, as his graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers have published widely, both in basic vision research
journals and ophthalmology journals, including *Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, Current Biology, Journal of Neuroscience,
Scientific Reports, Journal of Vision*, *Investigative Ophthalmology &
Visual Science*, and many others. Furthermore, members of his lab have
gone on to secure faculty positions at research universities, having
gained the professional and research skills they needed as faculty
during their time in the lab.

Dr. Dagmar Sternad has 25 years of experience studying movement
neuroscience and motor control, and has been instrumental in making
Northeastern University a high-quality research institution in the past
decade. Dr. Sternad has mentored 17 post-doctoral associates and 13
graduate students in her academic career, many of whom have gone on to
be professors in kinesiology and movement science. Dr. Sternad is an
accomplished grant writer, having received continuous research funding
over the past 23 years from the NIH, NSF, and many more. Her background
in the motor control of standing, walking, and complex behaviors in
varying task demands will provide critical support to our analysis of
the visuo-locomotor system in the experiments within this proposal.
Additionally, Dr. Sternad is an expert in scientific networking, as she
hosts the most prolific action-oriented talk series in all of Boston,
Boston Action Club. Her network of perception and action scientists
stretches across the world and having her as a co-sponsor will be
beneficial in helping me find promising venues for communicating my
scientific findings as well as providing career opportunities.

Northeastern University provides an outstanding research and academic
environment for interdisciplinary training in visual and motor
neuroscience. Dr. Matthis's lab at Northeastern University is a part of
an extensive network of researchers in the Boston area studying visual
and motor neuroscience. In my visits to Northeastern in preparation for
this proposal, I have already benefited from interactions with faculty,
postdocs, and students working in these areas. I am excited to engage in
journal clubs, talk series, audited courses, and lab meetings which will
all provide me with the particular expertise required to achieve my
goals of becoming an excellent researcher within perception and action.
