**Section II -- Sponsor and Co-Sponsor Information**

**A. Research support available**

**[Jonathan Samir Matthis, Sponsor]{.underline}**

[ACTIVE]{.underline}

R00-EY028229 (PI: Matthis) 07/2019 -- 07/2022 1.0 Academic

NIH/NEI \$249,000

RO1 EY05729-31 (PI - Hayhoe; co-I Ballard)      07/2019-07/2024
          1.5 summer

NIH/NEI          
                                                            \$249,000

NORTHEASTERN STARTUP FUNDS 07/2019-07/2024 \$505,228.00

**B. Sponsor's/Co-Sponsor's Previous Fellows/Trainees**

**Sponsor's Previous Trainees**

None\
\
**Co-Sponsor's Previous Trainees (Peter Bex)**

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Trainee Category**                **Number Supervised**
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  Post Doctoral Associates            17

  Pre Doctoral trainees               7
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

**Co-Sponsor (Peter Bex) Example Trainees**

+------------+--------+------+-----------------------+-----------------+
| **Name**   | **Cate | *    | **Present             | **Present       |
|            | gory** | *Dat | organization**        | Position**      |
|            |        | es** |                       |                 |
+============+========+======+=======================+=================+
| Dr Ankoor  | Pre    | 9    | Boston Children's     | Assistant       |
| Shah       | doc    | 6-98 | Hospital; Harvard     | Professor of    |
|            |        |      | Medical School        | Opthamology     |
+------------+--------+------+-----------------------+-----------------+
| Dr Michael | Post   | 0    | Oregon Health         | Knowles         |
| Chiang     | Doc    | 0-01 | Sciences University   | Professor of    |
|            |        |      |                       |                 |
|            |        |      |                       | Ophthalmology   |
|            |        |      |                       | and Medical     |
|            |        |      |                       |                 |
|            |        |      |                       | Informatics and |
|            |        |      |                       | Clinical        |
|            |        |      |                       |                 |
|            |        |      |                       | Epidemiology    |
+------------+--------+------+-----------------------+-----------------+
| Dr Sjoukje | Post   | 0    | Erasmus MC,           | Assistant       |
| Loudon     | Doc    | 7-08 | University Medical    | Professor       |
|            |        |      | Center, Rotterdam     |                 |
+------------+--------+------+-----------------------+-----------------+
| Dr         | Post   | 0    | Pontifical Catholic   | Professor and   |
| Christian  | Doc    | 7-08 | University of Chile   | Chair of        |
| Salgado    |        |      |                       | Opthamology     |
+------------+--------+------+-----------------------+-----------------+
| Dr Mary    | Post   | 2    | Boston Children's     | Instructor in   |
| Whitman    | Doc    | 013- | Hospital; Harvard     | Opthamology     |
|            |        | 2017 | Medical School        | (Mentored K     |
|            |        |      |                       | Grant)          |
+------------+--------+------+-----------------------+-----------------+

**Co-Sponsor's Previous Trainees (Dagmar Sternad)**

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Trainee Category**                **Number Supervised**
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  Post Doctoral Associates            17

  Pre Doctoral trainees               14
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

**Co-Sponsor (Dagmar Sternad) Example Trainees**

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Name**      **Category**   **Dates**   **Present             **Present
                                           organization**        Position**
  ------------- -------------- ----------- --------------------- ------------------
  Kunlin Wei    Pre Doc        00-02       Peking University,    Professor in
                                           China                 Psychology

  Masaki O. Abe Post Doc       07-10       Hokkaido University,  Associate
                                           Japan                 Professor

  Christopher   Post Doc       09-12       Department of         Assistant
  J. Hasson                                Physical Therapy,     Professor
                                           Northeastern          
                                           University            

  Hiromu        Post Doc       97-02       Daito Bunka           Professor
  Katsumata                                University, Tokyo,    
                                           Japan                 

  Se-Woong Park Post Doc       14-19       University of Texas,  Assistant
                                           San Antonio           Professor in
                                                                 Kinesiology,
                                                                 Health and
                                                                 Nutrition
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**C. Training Plan, Environment, Research Facilities**

[Training Plan]{.underline}

Trenton Wirth is completing his graduate training at Brown University
under the supervision of Dr. Bill Warren, where is studying cognitive
science with a focus in perception and action. Trenton's dissertation
work focuses on the self-organization of human crowds, where the complex
global patterns of crowd behavior are explained by the local, perceptual
interactions between neighbors. In his study of human crowds, Trenton
has gained extensive experience implementing psychophysically inspired
experiments in large, walkable virtual environments where participants
engage with tightly controlled displays of virtual crowds in various
scenarios. Trenton uses his virtual reality experiments to improve and
develop his labs behavioral dynamics model of human crowd behavior. This
model is then used to simulate trial-by-trial predictions within the
virtual reality studies. The model is additionally used to generalize to
the simulation of real human crowd behavior. Trenton has experience
analyzing rigid body motion capture data from real human swarms
collected from large gymnasium-like motion capture spaces, where
hypotheses tested in virtual crowds can be similarly tested in shorter
experiments with many people. This three-pronged approach of empirical
examination, model development and simulation, and the generalization to
real world behavior is commonly referred to as the modelling cycle in
the animal collective behavior literature. Trenton's experience
implementing the modelling cycle in the study of human crowd behavior is
a critical component of his training at Brown, and it is part of what he
brings to the table in this proposal, applying the same intellectual
rigor to the study of the visuo-locomotor system.

Trenton's passion for perception and action as well as his intuition for
how to navigate interdisciplinary spaces (spanning animal collective
behavior and vision science) has led him to arrange a post-doctoral
position with me in the Human Movement Neuroscience Lab at Northeastern
University starting in the Fall of 2020. Trenton plans to take his
knowledge of how to investigate complex perception and action systems
and apply it to the study of the visuo-locomotor system, with specific
interest in how visual search for footholds is shaped by the influence
of biomechanical information during locomotion. Trenton already brings a
deep understanding of experimental design in walkable virtual spaces.
His empirical intuition proved instrumental in designing the experiments
for this proposal. His understanding of complex perception and action
systems has also influenced his desire to receive training in measuring
visuo-locomotor behavior in natural environments. With my guidance,
alongside his selected co-sponsor experts in vision science (Dr. Peter
Bex) and motor control (Dr. Dagmar Sternad), Trenton will receive the
comprehensive training he needs to successfully achieve the aims
proposed.

To guide Trenton in his transition from a senior graduate student to an
independent interdisciplinary scientist, we have assessed his abilities
with respect to five different skill areas 1. Scientific scholarship, 2.
Research methodologies, 3. Communication skills, 4. Mentorship and
teaching, 5. Scientific professional service. In the preparation for
this grant, Trenton, the co-sponsors, and I have identified specific
goals for Trenton's training with respect to two pertinent domains of
research: A. Visual Neuroscience and B. Biomechanics. As a part of his
mentoring plan, the four of us will meet twice a year and discuss
Trenton's progress and provide feedback for development. In these
meetings, Trenton will express his long-term career goals, recent
accomplishments, and plans for the next six months. The co-sponsors and
I will advise and support Trenton in establishing realistic and
achievable goals in this time frame.

*Scientific Scholarship.* A critical component of this mentoring plan is
developing Trenton's interdisciplinary expertise. Trenton's already
versatile training in perception and action has prepared him with a deep
understanding of coarse perception and action behaviors (full rigid body
motion capture and measurement of head turns and body trajectory), and
it is the aim of this mentoring plan to develop his expertise in both
perception (visual neuroscience; *Training Objective 1*) and action
(motor neuroscience; *Training Objective 2*) such that he can develop
his expertise in *fine* perception and action research (eye tracking and
measurement of full body kinematics). Given that both visual and motor
neuroscience are relatively new to Trenton's scientific training, he
will receive instruction and reading material from the co-sponsors in
each of their respective fields, and audit courses to develop his
expertise of visual and motor neuroscience. With Dr. Peter Bex -- an
expert in visual neuroscience -- and Dr. Dagmar Sternad -- an expert in
motor neuroscience -- Trenton will receive world class training on each
side of his interdisciplinary journey, bringing them both together in
our lab space conducting scientific research of the visuo-locomotor
system of the highest quality.

*Research Methodologies.* Trenton will receive specific instruction from
me on the implementation of binocular mobile eye trackers in both indoor
laboratory spaces as well as unconstrained, natural outdoor
environments. This training will include tutelage in the proper
placement and orientation of the camera in order to get viable images of
the eye. Trent will learn to practice on himself, as well as other
members of the lab. He will also receive training in the proper
calibration of an eye tracker (using various standard and non-standard
methods). In the process of this training, he will gain familiarity with
computational video analysis techniques (using Matlab and Python
versions of the Open Computer Vision (OpenCV) toolbox. This familiarity
will allow him to understand the inner workings of his eye trackers. He
will also be encouraged to develop his own eye tracking methodologies,
when appropriate.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                Developing                            
                                                -\>                                   
                                                Independent                           
  --------------------- ----------------------- ------------- ------- ------- ------- -------
                        **Skill**               **1**         **2**   **3**   **4**   **5**

  **Scientific          Perception & Action                                            
  Scholarship**                                                                       

                        Visual Neuroscience                                            

                        Motor Control                                                  

  **Research            Experimental design in                                         
  Methodology**         virtual reality                                               

                        Eye Tracking                                                   

                        Motion Capture                                                 

  **Communication       Data Visualization                                             
  Skills**                                                                            

                        Oral Presentation                                              

                        Manuscript Preparation                                         

  **Teaching and        College-level class                                            
  Mentoring**           teaching                                                      

                        Mentoring Students in                                          
                        Research                                                      

  **Professional        Responsible Conduct of                                         
  Service**             Research                                                      

                        Academic Service                                               

                        Peer Reviewing                                                 
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As part of this training, Trent will also gain experience in full-body
biomechanical analysis of human movement. Although Trent has worked with
motion capture before, he has not yet learned how to analyze full-body
kinematic (mocap) and kinetic (force plate) data to investigate
low-level mechanical aspects of human movement, such as the joint
torques that facilitate movement through the world.

Trent's training in eye tracking and full-body motion capture will come
together as he learns to integrate these two data types to re-construct
subjects' body-relative gaze behavior in the activities described in
Aims 1 and 2. He will perform this integration under the guidance of Dr
Matthis, using techniques developed in his lab. The lab based
experiments in Aims 1 and 2 will provide the applicant with the skills
and background he will need to complete the more technically difficult
outdoor research activities described in Aim 3. Again, these activities
will take place under the guidance of Dr Matthis, and will involve
extensive self-testing prior to the recruitment of non-lab research
participants.

*Communication Skills.* Trenton's eclectic intellectual background
combines theory from vision science, animal collective behavior, and
behavioral dynamics. This has led him to present his research to a wide
variety of audiences: over the past five years Trenton has presented
four times at the Vision Sciences Society conference (three posters and
one talk), a poster presentation at the Institute for Computational and
Experimental Research in Mathematics conference, and a co-authored book
chapter describing crowd dynamics and their study to an audience of
safety engineers. In his training at Northeastern, we will continue to
develop Trenton's oral communication skills where he will present first
author oral presentations at a variety of conferences (VSS, AMAM, SFN,
Dynamic Walking, & SicB) where he can simultaneously grow his
understanding of visual neuroscience (*Training Objective 1*) and motor
neuroscience (*Training Objective 2*). Additionally, the proposed
research will also serve as an opportunity to prepare at least three
first author manuscripts, where he will receive the guidance from myself
and the co-sponsors, who all together have experience and success at
communicating scientific findings in visual neuroscience, motor
neuroscience, and the visual control of locomotion.

*Mentorship and Teaching.* Another critical component of Trenton's
training will be providing him opportunities to mentor junior
scientists. As an early post-doctoral associate of the Human Movement
Neuroscience Lab, Trenton will have the opportunity to mentor, manage,
and assist in the hiring of undergraduate research assistants and co-op
students from the highly regarded Northeastern University co-op program.
In the preparation for this proposal, Trenton has already attended
virtual lab meetings and scheduled his own virtual lab meetings with
current co-op students, guiding them through the process of establishing
the Augmented Reality environment for psychophysical experimentation.
Additionally, as the only other scientist in the lab, Trenton's insight
and mentorship will be invaluable in the education and scientific
shaping of incoming graduate students. Finally, Trenton will have the
opportunity to guest lecture on perception and action (his primary
expertise) in relevant sections within my courses. In general, Trent
will be involved with the development of the teaching syllabus of the
classes that I teach, in order to provide him with the experience he
will need in his future career as an educator.

*Professional Service.* Further development of professional skills is
the final area of focus. As a student supported for three years from his
PhD advisors' grants from the National Science Foundation, Trenton has
received regular training in the Responsible Conduct of Research. In
this time, he has learned a great deal about research ethics with
respect to human subjects, data management, scientific reporting,
intellectual property, and healthy mentor-mentee relationships. Having
already established a high value and respect for RCR in universities,
Trenton will seek out RCR workshops offered at Northeastern in line with
NIH principles, and additionally use this as an opportunity to remain on
top of the best practices for mentors and mentees. Additionally, Trenton
will be encouraged to engage and assist in the organizations of the many
journal clubs and seminar meetings organized at Northeastern, such as
Dr. Peter Bex's journal club in Vision Science, and Dr. Dagmar Sternad's
Boston-renowned Boston Action Club, hosted at Northeastern. Finally,
this proposal will open the door for Trenton to gain experience in peer
review of scientific manuscripts, as the sponsor will invite him to
contribute toward peer review requests that he and the lab receives.

[Environment]{.underline}

The sponsor is a new professor at Northeastern and is still building his
lab. As such, the applicant will have ample opportunity to see what life
is like for a new PI and gain valuable hands-on experience in the
establishing a new lab. In addition, the applicant will work closely
with the two co-sponsors, each of whom are established leaders in their
respective fields and have vibrant and diverse labs of their own. The
applicant's experience working with PIs at various career stages will
provide valuable training in preparation for his own career as an
independent researcher. [\
]{.underline}

[Research Facilities]{.underline}

All experimental studies with healthy human subjects will take place in
the so-called BIG lab shared by Dr Jonathan Matthis and Josh Stefanik
located in Richards Hall at Northeastern University. Housed in Richards
Hall on Northeastern's main campus, the Action Lab has an approximate
space of over 3,100 sqft dedicated to the study of full-body human
movement. This lab has state-of-the-art 31-camera Qualisys motion
capture system providing over 140m^2^ of usable full-body capture volume
within a 7.6m x 18.5m area, 5 AMTI 400600 force plates, and a FLOAT
multi-directional active bodyweight support system, a Bertec
instrumented spilt treadmill, several Pupil Labs mobile eye trackers and
a Delsys wireless EMG system. The labspace also includes a lockable exam
room that be used for confidential conversations and secure storage of
sensitive documents.

Northeastern University offers formal training in responsible conduct of
research, grant preparation, manuscript preparation and provides
training for effective methods for giving research and teaching
seminars. Trent will be encouraged to attend these courses as part of
her tenure at Northeastern University. Trent will have no mandatory
teaching requirements and she will have no clinic commitments. However,
he will be encouraged to give occasional lectures, seminars and
tutorials for graduate and undergraduate students. Trent will also be
encouraged to participate in the seminars organized by the two
co-sponsors - The Northeastern Vision Club (Bex) and the Boston Action
Club (Sternad)

**D. Number of Fellows / Trainees to be Supervised During the
Fellowship**

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Counts (Including     Sponsor's Current       Co-Sponsor's Current
  Applicant)**            Trainees                Trainees
  ----------------------- ----------------------- -----------------------
  Post Doctoral           0                       5
  Accociates                                      

  Pre Doctoral Trainees   0                       9
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

**E. Applicant's Qualifications and Potential for a Research Career**

Trenton Wirth has great potential as a perception and action scientist.
He is a brilliant experimentalist who has leveraged his training at
Brown University to develop a deep understanding of complex systems,
emboldening his research endeavors to address difficult questions that
others might shy away from. Trenton has a deep intuition for the
connectedness of perception and action as *one* system, this intuition
stems back to his education as an undergraduate student at the
University of Cincinnati. His intuition for perception and action makes
him well suited to tackle the difficult interdisciplinary work of
pulling the threads between visual and motor neuroscience. On top of his
intuition and his expertise in experimental design, it is his passion
for this subject that drives him toward success. Trenton communicates
this enthusiasm in the classroom, having received high ratings from his
teaching assistant reviews from both students and professors.
Additionally, and perhaps most importantly, Trenton has demonstrated
that he is a kind and thoughtful mentor to undergraduate students and
junior graduate students within his department at Brown.

Trenton has achieved a great deal in his time at Brown University and
will be defending his doctoral thesis two months after this proposal has
been submitted. In his time at Brown, Trenton has mastered skills in
experimental design for large scale virtual and real world environments,
behavioral dynamical modeling, and the simulation of perception and
action behaviors -- all of which will be invaluable to him in his career
as a perception and action scientist. As an ABD graduate student,
Trenton has an impressive history in scientific communication, having
presented four posters and one first author talk at two different
conferences, as well as one co-authored book chapter publication, where
he communicated his methodological expertise in the study of crowd
behavior to an engineering audience. Trenton's ambitious ideas and
creative spirit have been recognized through financial award. Trenton's
final year of graduate school has been supported by the Link Foundation
Modeling Simulation and Training Fellowship. In 2018, Trenton and his
lab were one of the three winning teams in the Brown University Hyundai
Visionary Challenge, where he and his lab mates were awarded for their
design of a research program to study the perceptual control of flying
cars.

Trenton's career interests, however, are much more grounded in the
important problem of understanding human mobility and its connection to
the perceptual system. A person's ability to independently move through
their environments is vital to their quality of life, and there is
incredibly little known about the connection between visual and motor
neuroscience during locomotion to support an understanding of how
visuo-locomotor behavior might be affected by retinal (or motor)
diseases. There is a desperate need for scientists with
interdisciplinary training to tackle the study of perception and action
problems which are of great interest to public health and wellbeing.
Trenton is uniquely positioned both with his training in perception and
action from Brown and the proper resources and environment at
Northeastern to become this scientist that is so vital to progress in
visual and motor neuroscience.
