**TRAINING IN RESPONSIBLE CONDUCT OF RESEARCH**

[Format]{.underline}:

To receive training in the responsible conduct of research (RCR), I will
complete Northeastern University's RCR workshops as needed to fulfill my
training. Postdoctoral researchers paid on NRSA F32 awards must complete
RCR training, which includes both in-person and online modules. To
maintain a conducive training environment, workshops are limited to 30
participants and are filled based on need. This will allow for
face-to-face discussion after lecture style presentations, depending on
the University's ability to re-open during the Coronavirus pandemic. In
lieu of meeting in person, to comply with CDC and University policy,
sessions may be held over zoom, but the same level of participation is
anticipated. Certification in RCR requires participation in 7 workshops.
At the end of the certification training, each participant must present
a short presentation on a specific issue covered during the workshop.

RCR training is also accessible through Collaborative Institutional
Training Initiative (CITI) in online modules that can be completed at
the researcher's leisure. I will complete the Basic Biomedical Research
Investigators course offered by CITI, which incorporates readings, case
studies, lessons, historical perspectives and quizzes about difficult
ethical situations that arise in research and how to resolve these
issues.

Additionally, I regularly discuss ethical issues in research practice
with my sponsor. I will be trained in best practices in data management,
human subjects privacy protection, and data acquisition. My sponsor and
I will also discuss my field's standards for authorship, data sharing,
and publication and peer review.

[Subject Matter]{.underline}:

Both classroom discussion-based sessions and online training (CITI)
modules address topics including, but not limited to: collaborative
research; conflict of interest and commitment (personal, professional
and financial); data acquisition and laboratory tools; mentor/mentee
responsibilities and relationships; peer review; publication practices &
responsible authorship; research misconduct (including policies for
management of misconduct); sexual harassment; diversity and inclusion;
data sharing and ownership.

[Faculty Participation]{.underline}:

Faculty as well as students are encouraged to participate in the same
workshop setting. Faculty from various departments within Northeastern
University often lead workshops with topics with which they are well
acquainted. In the past two years, the following faculty members are
some of those who have presented various RCR topics: Dr. Patricia
Mabrouk, Professor of Chemistry & Chemical Biology; Dr. Abigail Koppes,
Assistant Professor Department of Chemical Engineering, School of
Engineering.

[Duration of Instruction]{.underline}:

Each workshop lasts a total of eight hours and are broken up into 1-2
hour long sessions. Online CITI modules can be taken at one's own pace.
Additional discussion of ethical issues may take place within one on one
meeting times with my sponsor, which will happen once a week.

[Frequency of Instruction]{.underline}:

Northeastern provides RCR workshops are offered twice during the
calendar year, once in January and once in August, based on need and
interest. The topics for the workshops additionally vary. I will
participate in Northeastern hosted workshops during my first year of the
training grant and will update my CITI training as needed in 2022.
Discussions with my sponsor with concern to research ethics will occur
during the entirety of the fellowship.
